docs: ot2-cleaning-and-maintenance-revisions (#20267)
OpenTrons/opentrons-api: docs/ot-2/docs/maintenance/cleaning.md

---
title: "Opentrons OT-2: Cleaning"
---

Routine cleaning helps keep your OT-2 free of contaminants that can affect your protocols. Cleaning also gives you a chance to inspect the robot for wear and damage. Review this section for information and instructions on how to clean your robot.

> If you have any questions about cleaning your OT-2 or its related components, contact the support team at <support@opentrons.com>.

Reviewer: house style
```suggestion
If you have any questions about cleaning your OT-2 or its related components, contact Opentrons Support at <support@opentrons.com>.
```

- Turn off power to the module and disconnect any USB or power cables.
- Remove the module from its deck slot.

!!!warning
    - Do not disassemble modules for cleaning or attempt to clean their internal electronic components.
    - Do not put OT-2 modules in an autoclave. The high temperatures, pressures, and steam used inside an autoclave can damage the electronics, circuit boards, small electric motors, and other sensitive components.

### General module cleaning

Once you've prepared the module for cleaning:

1. Dampen a soft, clean cloth or paper towel with a cleaning solution.
2. Gently wipe off the module's surfaces.
3. Rinse off any remaining residue using a cloth dampened with distilled water.
4. Let the module air dry.

### Thermocycler seals

To set up the Thermocycler with a clean, reusable rubber seal:

1. Affix a seal to the Thermocycler lid (if one isn't attached already).
2. Wipe the seal with a 1:10 diluted bleach solution.
3. Rinse the seal with molecular biology grade water.
4. Let the seal air dry.

> ![Thermocycler with labeled seal](../images/thermocycler-seal.svg)

Reviewer: this image is very large. consider adding a width attribute.

Author: Will do!

## Autoclaving labware

Opentrons doesn't recommend re-using autoclaved labware with your OT-2. The heat and pressure may cause items to warp or shrink, even if they're considered "autoclave safe." While autoclaved labware may be acceptable for quick, proof-of-concept testing, it's always better to use fresh labware for production runs, which helps ensure the best results. You can find robot-compatible labware in the [Opentrons Labware Library](https://labware.opentrons.com/) and on the [Tips & Labware section](https://opentrons.com/products/categories/tips-&-labware) of our website.

## Self-service inspection schedule

Along with routine cleaning, Opentrons also recommends the following optional procedures to help keep your OT-2 running smoothly. Feel free to adapt this schedule to your robot's workload. Alternatively, let Opentrons do the work for you. Our [service offerings](https://opentrons.com/instrument-services) cover a range of options to adapt to the needs of your lab.

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Frequency</th>

>       <th>Task</th>

Reviewer: I think the items in this "Task" column should be sentence case instead of title case.

Reviewer: …while keeping our proper nouns like Labware Position Check

Author: oh, that's embarrassing. this is probably just ported over original text. The middle column should be sentence case.

      <th>Notes</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td rowspan="2">Daily</td>
      <td>Empty Trash Bin</td>
      <td>If the trash bin reaches capacity.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Inspect the Deck</td>

>       <td>N/A</td>

Reviewer: Surely there's some guidance here? What would constitute a "failed" inspection?

    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td rowspan="2">Weekly</td>
      <td>Pipette visual check</td>
      <td>If pipette aspirate or dispense actions appear to show any signs of malfunction or pipetting inaccuracy.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>OT-2, Module, and Pipette Cleaning</td>
      <td>Immediately after contamination or spillage occurs, or if the pipette and/or module look dirty.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td rowspan="2">Monthly</td>
      <td>Check Single-Channel Pipette's Ejection Mechanism</td>
      <td>If the pipette does not eject/pick up tips consistently.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Power Cycle OT-2 and Modules</td>

>       <td>N/A</td>

Reviewer: Not sure what else to say here but maybe we should fill this space here too. Something like "If not power cycled more frequently as part of lab procedure."

Author: ![it_does_work_sometimes](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d1a51b46-37c1-401e-a0c2-c9549c87f73a)

    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Quarterly</td>
      <td>Robot Calibration Health Check</td>
      <td>If movement appears to be malfunctioning or incorrect. Or after deck calibration, pipette offset calibration, or tip length calibration.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td rowspan="4">Every six months</td>
      <td>Deck Calibration</td>

>       <td>If OT-2's Calibration Health Check shows inaccurate calibration results. Or if installing a new pipette. Or if pipette positioning appears to cause crashing into the deck or labware.</td>

Reviewer: Bullets instead of these "Or if…" sentences?

Author: Replacing with bullets throughout table.

    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Pipette Offset</td>
      <td>If OT-2's Calibration Health Check shows inaccurate calibration results. Or if installing a new pipette. Or if pipette positioning appears to cause crashing into the deck or labware.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Tip Length Calibration</td>
      <td>If installing a new pipette.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Labware Position Check</td>
      <td>If liquid handler positioning to any designated labware appears to be offset. Or if installing and using new types of labware from previous runs.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td rowspan="3">Yearly</td>
      <td>Pipette Replacement</td>
      <td>If pipette aspirate or dispense actions appear to show any signs of malfunction or pipetting inaccuracy.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Air Clean Electronics Board</td>
      <td>If noticeable dust and debris have accumulated on the black electronics cover.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Replace the O-rings on your 8-Channel GEN2 pipette</td>

>       <td>Replace the rubber O-ring wrapped around the outside of each channel if you notice any nicks or tears.</td>

Reviewer: funny copy here
```suggestion
      <td>Replace 8-Channel GEN2 pipette O-rings</td>
      <td>If you notice any nicks or tears on the O-rings.</td>
```
